KEP-3939: Consider terminating pods in job controller (#3940)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/3939-consider-terminating-pods-jobs/README.md

pods as like they were active.  The goal of this KEP is to allow for opt-in behavior where terminating pods count as active.  This will allow users to see that new pods will be only created once the existing pods have fully terminated.

## Motivation

Existing Issues:

- [Job Creates Replacement Pods as soon as Pod is marked for deletion](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/115844)
- [Kueue: Account for terminating pods when doing preemption](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/510)

Many common machine learning frameworks, such as Tensorflow and JAX, require unique pods.  If a terminating pod is not considered active, a replacement pod is created and
can cause errors.  This is a rare case but it can provide problems if a job needs to guarantee that the existing pods terminate
before starting new pods.  

In scarce compute environments, these resources can be difficult to obtain so pods can take a long time to find resources and they may only be able to find nodes once the existing pods have been terminated.

If a job is stuck in terminating, it could be possible for autoscaling to kick in and give a new node.  

> This is not ideal if you could just wait for the pod to terminating and reuse that node.  

Reviewer: I see no need in the motivation or user stories to actually count the terminating pods as active. I see only a feature request that a pod recreation delay is required until a cleanup is performed. Is there a reason or a use case for changing the counting at the API level?

It seems to me that we are unnecessarily changing the behavior of `status.active` depending on how the `spec` is configured. We can meet the requirements by just recording the information in `status.terminating` without modifying the status behavior.

Users can have a simpler mental model for the `status.active` field as a number of pods doing useful work. The value may change depending on a number of factors, but at least the meaning would be predictable. If a user is surprised that there are no active pods, s/he can consult the status first and then go back to spec as to why this is so, but the user can always  trust the status.

Side note: we should consider the API surface first, but implementation wise this can be done by tracking activeAndTerminating pods internally, or revising each place in a job logic where active pods are considered, but we should pay attention what we write in the status.

Reviewer 2: I thought the KEP had departed from the idea of counting terminating pods as active.
But the implementation details seem to say otherwise. I agree that we shouldn't change the concept of active.

That said, there is motivation to knowing the number of terminating pods, like story 2 states. But this is covered by having a `.status.terminating` field.

Author: Sorry about the confusion.  I pushed up a change.  

We are counting terminating pods separately from active.  As @alculquicondor says, there was a request that we should count the number of terminating pods.

I mention another case with @mimowo work on Retriable jobs is that we are counting active differently if `PodDisruptionCondition` is true or false.

Reviewer: - I think either the implementation part needs to be a bit rewritten to be more abstract or more specific. Or/and we should clearly define the guarantees for the `.status.active` that it will not be changed.
- there is still inconsistent usage of "active" in the KEP

> I mention another case with @mimowo work on Retriable jobs is that we are counting active differently if PodDisruptionCondition is true or false.

From KEP perspective, I would not say we are counting active differently, just that there is a known bug/edge case

Reviewer 2: We should be renaming `FilterActivePods` to `FilterActiveAndTerminatingPods` to avoid confusion. That would normally come up in the code review, but the fact that there's a snippet in the KEP makes the design confusing.

Removing that level of detail in the KEP is fine.

Author: I removed that section.

Another issue is described here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3940#discussion_r1180777509.  

If PodDisruptionConditions is disabled, a pod bound to a no-longer-existing node may be stuck in the Running phase. As a consequence, it will never be replaced, so the whole job will be stuck from making progress.

Due to the above issue, we can set phase=Failed when PodDisruptionConditions is enabled OR JobRecreatePodsWhenFailed is enabled. When JobRecreatePodsWhenFailed enabled, but PodDisruptionConditions disabled we would just set the phase, but without adding the condition.

## Design Details

### Job API Definition

At the JobSpec level, we are adding a new enum field:

```golang
// This field controls when we recreate pods
// Default will be TerminatingOrFailed ie recreate pods when they are failed
// +enum 
type RecreatePodsWhen string
const (
 // This is a field that recreates pods when they are marked as terminating or failed
 // ie this means that as soon as pods get marked for deletion they will be recreated
 TerminatingOrFailed RecreatePodsWhen = "TerminatingOrFailed"
 // Only recreate pods when they are marked as failed.

>  Failed              RecreatePodsWhen = "Failed"

Reviewer: `RecreatePodsWhen` field could work for Deployments as well. The values probably not. We should at least make sure that we sync between Job and Deployment when adding new values to prevent same concepts named differently.

We should make sure the synonyms and shape is consistent. For example we might be adding the following values to deployments: `TerminatingOrTerminal`, `Terminal`

I wonder if there should be some process about these naming conventions? Should we drop a comment here and in deployments about this?

Author: The reason we split this as it still seems that the API for Deployment is not set yet.  I'm happy for some help on the deployment side.  I think we decided to split partially because we think the Job KEP is ready for review and there is still a lot of discussion on the deployment API.  And it seems that there is not likely going to be a similar API for both at this moment.  Other reason was so that we fully decouple these two KEPS from each other.  

I think the implementation is similar but there seems to be some more dicussion needed for the deployment side.

Reviewer: I agree, it is probably better to focus on the Job first. We should just keep in back of our mind that it could be relevant for deployments, that is all. 

Ping me once you switch the attention to deployments. In case you will not have a time to focus on the other KEP, I can take over if you want.

Author: I'll let you know.  I will not be able to get to Deployments this release and I'll see how the code review goes for this KEP.

https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

#### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: JobRecreatePodsWhenFailed
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-controller-manager

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

For enabling JobRecreatePodsWhenFailed:

a) Count the number of terminating pods and populate in JobStatus

> b) FilterActiveJobs will include both active and terminating.

Reviewer: this is an implementation detail, we should describe how this will affect the API, more specifically `.status.active`

Author: I'll update this.

We propose two new API fields:

1) A field in Spec that allows for opt-in behavior of whether to wait for terminating pods to finish before recreating.
2) A new field for tracking the number of terminating pods.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a machine learning user, ML frameworks allow scheduling of multiple pods.  
The Job controller does not typically wait for terminating pods to be marked as failed.  
Tensorflow and other ML frameworks may have a requirement that they only want Pods to be started once the other pods are fully terminated.

This case was added due to a bug discovered with running IndexedJobs with Tensorflow.  
See [Jobs create replacement Pods as soon as a Pod is marked for deletion](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/115844) for more details.

#### Story 2

As a cloud user, users would want to guarantee that the number of pods that are running is exactly the amount that they specify.  
Terminating pods do not relinguish resources so scarce compute resource are still scheduled to those pods.
See [Kueue: Account for terminating pods when doing preemption](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/510) for an example of this.

> ### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Reviewer 2: Can you add a note about whether we will continue considering "terminating pods" as Failed?

If you prefer to consider this as outside of the scope of this KEP, leaving a link here is still useful.

Author: Added.

any review.
-->

<!--
A table of contents is helpful for quickly jumping to sections of a KEP and for
highlighting any additional information provided beyond the standard KEP
template.

Ensure the TOC is wrapped with
  <code>&lt;!-- toc --&rt;&lt;!-- /toc --&rt;</code>
tags, and then generate with `hack/update-toc.sh`.
-->

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (Optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
  - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Job API Definition](#job-api-definition)
  - [Implementation](#implementation)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Prerequisite testing updates](#prerequisite-testing-updates)
      - [Unit tests](#unit-tests)
      - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
      - [e2e tests](#e2e-tests)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
    - [Alpha](#alpha)
    - [Beta](#beta)
    - [GA](#ga)

>     - [Alpha](#alpha-1)

Author: Thanks for that.  It was commented out but `hack/update-toc.sh` was still adding it to the TOC.  Fixed.

If PodDisruptionConditions is disabled, a pod bound to a no-longer-existing node may be stuck in the Running phase. As a consequence, it will never be replaced, so the whole job will be stuck from making progress.

A suggestion is to fix this outside of this KEP as bug in the Pod Garbage Collector but we want to call this out as a potential risk.  

## Design Details

### Job API Definition

At the JobSpec level, we are adding a new enum field:

```golang
// This field controls when we recreate pods
// Default will be TerminatingOrFailed ie recreate pods when they are failed
// +enum 
type RecreatePodsWhen string
const (
 // This is a field that recreates pods when they are marked as terminating or failed
 // ie this means that as soon as pods get marked for deletion they will be recreated
 TerminatingOrFailed RecreatePodsWhen = "TerminatingOrFailed"
 // Only recreate pods when they are marked as failed.
 Failed              RecreatePodsWhen = "Failed"
)
```

```golang
type JobSpec struct{
  ...
 // RecreatePodsWhen specifies when pods should be recreated.
 // TerminatingOrFailed means to recreate when a pod is either terminating or failed

>  // Failed is the default.

Author: good call.  yea you are correct.

 // Failed means to wait until pods are fully terminated or failed before recreating
 // +optional

>  RecreatePodsWhen *RecreatePodsWhen

Author: Can I rename the feature toggle to be `JobRecreatePodsWhenFailed`?

>  RecreatePodsWhen *RecreatePodsWhen

Reviewer 3: sgtm

In scarce compute environments, these resources can be difficult to obtain so pods can take a long time to find resources and they may only be able to find nodes once the existing pods have been terminated.

If a job is stuck in terminating, it could be possible for autoscaling to kick in and give a new node.  
This is not ideal if you could just wait for the pod to terminating and reuse that node.  

### Goals

- Job controller should allow for flexibility in waiting for pods to be fully terminated before
  creating new ones
- Job controller will have a new status field where we include the number of terminating replicas.

### Non-Goals

> 

Reviewer 2: You can say, "Other workload APIs are not included in this proposal", to account for Deployment/ReplicaSet, now removed.

Author: done.

## Proposal

The Job controller get a list of active pods.  Active pods usually mean pods that have not been registered for deletion.  
In this KEP, we will consider terminating pods to be separate from active and failed.  
This means that for cases where we track the number of pods, like the Job Controller, we should include a field that states the number of terminating pods.  

We propose two apis:

> 1) A field in Spec that allows for opt-in behavior of including terminating pods as active.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1) A field in Spec that allows for opt-in behavior of whether to wait for terminating pods to finish before recreating.
```

The proposal is not considering terminating as active anymore.

### API Name Choices

<<[UNRESOLVED  Name for the API]>>
Options for the API

- TerminatingAsActive (BoolPtr)
- ActiveUntilTerminal (BoolPtr)
- DelayPodRecreationUntilTerminal (BoolPtr)

> - recreatePodsWhen (enum of TerminatingOrFailed|Failed)

Reviewer 2: I prefer this

Reviewer 2: I suggest you go with this for the KEP, and we can always adjust during code reviews.

Author: I forgot to remove this but yea I added this as the api defintion.

> ### Implementation

Reviewer 2: Implementation details might not be that important in a KEP, but what you detail here is high-level enough that you can keep it.

What's more important is semantics, and there are some missing here:
- What happens when a Job is suspended? Ideally, we would keep track of the terminating pods.
- What happens when we hit a backoffLimit or the rule "FailJob" for failure policies. Ideally we keep track of terminating pods here as well. Then we have to decide whether we can add the Failed condition before all pods terminate. We could.
